[Music]
hello
i'm tom seyfried professor of biology at
boston college
in chestnut hill massachusetts
i'll be presenting information today
describing cancer as a metabolic disease
and then discuss the implications that
this information has for the development
of novel
cancer therapies
i'd like to start my
presentations
with an overview of the current cancer
crisis
so that we can get a full appreciation
of the challenges that we have
so this this this chart
data from the american cancer society
shows the number of new cases deaths per
year and deaths per day from 2013 to to
estimated
information from 2020.
so as you can see there is a significant
increase in the number of new cases over
the years
and there was about a 4.3 increase in
the number of deaths from cancer in the
united states per year and over 1600
people a day dying from cancer
um uh each each day during these during
these periods
this the this is rather
depressing
and concerning information in stating
that we have made
little if any major progress in reducing
cancer deaths over this period so one
has to ask the question you know what is
largely responsible
for the failure to manage uh to prevent
or manage cancer
and
in my mind it has to do with the
view of how we understand cancer is
cancer a nuclear genetic disease or is
it a mitochondrial metabolic disease and
i'll be discussing information
that shows that cancer is primarily a
mitochondrial metabolic disease and
what's shown here is a picture
of a cartoon of a cell
pointing out two of the critical
organelles the mitochondrion
and the nucleus
i will be presenting evidence that it is
the mitochondrial damage to oxidative
phosphorylation
that ultimately leads to the mutations
in the nucleus and that the mutations in
the nucleus
are downstream epi arise as downstream
epi phenomenon of the damage to the
mitochondria
the organ the origin of cellular energy
in the cell and as you can see these
little bean-shaped organelles are the
mitochondria and the little squiggly
squiggly material inside
are cristae and they are responsible for
the generation of energy through
oxidative phosphorylation
now we have had major scientific
theories help explain the phenomenons of
nature over uh over centuries
and a theory is uh is simply an attempt
to explain the facts of nature
reality is based on the replicated facts
repeated by numbers of scientists and
laboratories whereas the interpretation
of the facts is based on the theory to
explain this
we know from past
studies the heliocentric theory could
explain better the movements of the
celestial bodies
than could the geocentric theory
the catholic church held for centuries
along with aristotle and others that the
earth was the center of the solar system
it was the work of of copernicus and
galileo that showed that it was in fact
the sun
overturning this uh world view
on the origin of the solar system in the
universe
the germ theory could explain better the
origin of contagious diseases than could
the miasma or bad air theory it was
louis pasteur who
proposed that cancer was caught or
cancer diseases i should say
were caused by invisible microbes
pasteur took a lot of uh of of grief and
uh challenge in his in his concepts but
it was eventually proven that he was
correct the theory of evolution the
darwin wallace theory of evolution by
natural selection could better explain
the origin of species on this planet
than could the theory of special
creation
what i'll be addressing today is ken the
mitochondrial metabolic theory explain
better the facts of cancer than can the
somatic mutation theory the dominant
theory
today
so the current dogma about cancer is
that cancer is a genetic disease and
this paper published by doug hanahan and
robert weinberg hallmarks of cancer the
next generation is one of the most
highly cited papers in all of the and
all of the field of biology
the take home message of the cancer
cancer cells carry the oncogenic and
tumor suppressor mutations that define
cancer as a genetic disease
this dogmatic view of the nature of
cancer is present in all major textbooks
of biology biochemistry and cell biology
it's also the message that you see on
the
website from the national cancer
institute cancer is a genetic disease
there's no other there's no other
discussion of alternative views
so this this dogmatic view has
indoctrinated several generations of
physicians and scientists into the view
that cancer is caused by somatic
mutations
the somatic mutation theory is the basis
for the view that cancer is a genetic
disease
mutations in genes that inhibit or
stimulate cell division contribute to
cancer so we have mutations in tumor
suppressor genes that fail to suppress
division out of control and we have
mutations in proto-oncogenes that
stimulate cells to divide out of control
the phenotype of cancer is cell division
out of control so this is the definition
cell division out of control driven by
defects in suppressor genes and in
proto-oncogenes
the somatic theory
argues that it is the accumulation of
random mutations that causes the
development of a cancer cell
so normal cells
suffer a series of
random mutations no one's sure how many
this this
cartoon shows four
and the normal growth control cell
eventually enters into a mesenchymal
malignant cell
and this malignant cell will then grow
out of control and possibly spread
throughout the body
and here's a quote from dr vogelstein
one of the leading
scientists supporting the gene theory of
cancer
stating we now know precisely what
causes cancer a sequential series of
alterations in well-known driver genes
so these driver genes are considered the
most important genes for driving
the development of cells out of control
and the result of our
work in studying cancer as a genetic
disease is the development of
personalized therapy or we call
precision medicine
and this woman is looking at a screen of
breast cancer cells to see if they
possess extra copies of a particular
gene and this information then may play
a role
in prognosis or diagnosis or something
like this now this would be certainly
very very important if in fact these
mutations
were in fact related to the origin of
the disease and as i will show you their
downstream epic phenomenon and have
mostly have little of any relevance to
the nature of cancer
the other problem is to get information
like this
biopsy material is necessary so tissue
from patients must be taken and examined
for these genetic changes in the very
process of taking the biopsy material
you disturb this the cancer cell micro
environment the cellular micro
microenvironment which leads to a risk
of spreading the cancer so you're
getting information that may be
irrelevant and putting the patient at
risk by getting this information
now let's look at evidence that
challenges the somatic mutation theory
anytime evidence comes along that
challenges a major entrenched concept
oftentimes those that work in the field
they don't want to look at this
information they don't want to speak
about it they don't want to hear about
it basically they want to ignore it
so let's look at the evidence that
challenges the somatic mutation theory
the origin originator of the theory was
theodore bovary in 1914
he actually
was the first to suggest the possibility
that defects in a cell nucleus might be
responsible for the origin of cancer
however he was extremely apologetic
about his conclusions and he he clearly
stated he knew nothing about cancer
never studied cancer and that his essay
was purely a speculative discussion
yet he was made out to be the person who
originated the theory of cancer as a
genetic disease
there's now accumulating evidence
showing that the different types of
cancers have no mutations even deep
sequencing analysis of certain malignant
cancer types was unable to identify
genes that could be attributed to cancer
there were no mutations in some cancers
hard to explain
new information is showing that cancer
driver genes are found in normal cells
in other words normal cells in normal
tissues express mutations in the
so-called key genes that are supposed to
drive the disease
how is it possible that normal cells
could have cancer driver disease and not
develop cancer how is it possible that
cancer some arranging cancers have no
mutations the somatic mutation theory
has not explained or discussed this at
all
there's also carcinogens that we know
about that do not cause mutations such
as asbestos and some other uh
carcinogens that are not associated with
the development
of cancer
also we have to consider the rarity of
cancer in our closest primate relatives
the chimpanzees and gorillas
these are cancer is extremely rare in
chimpanzees chimpanzees are about 99
similar to us
in form of protein and and and gene
sequencing yet cancer is extremely rare
indeed there has never been a documented
case of breast cancer in a female
chimpanzee yet forty six thousand
uh uh women in this kind in the united
states die from breast cancer each year
how is this possible
it's linked to diet and lifestyle issues
there's a non-mutagenic origin of
metastatic cancer
metastatic behavior not having linked to
any mutagenic origin
there are off-target effects of these
so-called cancer precision drugs that
are made to precisely target specific
genes that are involved yet the
off-target effects are quite
debilitating and life-threatening this
should not happen if these drugs are
precise
finally the nuclear transfer
mitochondrial transfer experiments
provide the strongest evidence to argue
against the origin of cancer as a
genetic disease and what i have done is
published this paper cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease in the
journal frontiers in cell and
developmental biology and i encourage
everyone to read this paper very
carefully because it presents
large amounts of data that specifically
argue against the gene theory of cancer
and in support of the mitochondrial
metabolic
origin of the disease
and this slide this cartoon simply
summarizes the vast numbers of
experiments
that were presented in the paper
so what we have here are normal cells
and these normal cells contain a normal
integrated nuclear genome and they also
have normal mitochondria in the
cytoplasm so that they can regulate
their physiology quite quite normally
both energetically and genetically
and they beget normal cells now the red
cells are tumor cells and tumor cells
beget other tumor cells tumor cells have
many gene mutations in the nucleus but
they also have defects in the cytoplasm
in the mitochondria lacking cristae or
having other abnormalities
now is it the mutations in the nucleus
that causes cancer or is it the defects
in the mitochondria of the cytoplasm
that causes the cancer
these experiments were addressed quite
clearly by nuclear and mitochondrial
transfer experiments so the nucleus of
the tumor cell is then placed in the
cytoplasm of a normal cell
and what was found is that you got that
there were normal cells produced
sometimes normal tissues and sometimes a
mouse or a frog cloned from the nucleus
of a tumor cell but these organisms
showed no cancer
on the other hand the nucleus of the
normal cell was placed in the cytoplasm
of the tumor cell and rather than
forming tumor cells
or
rather than
forming normal cells they continue to
produce either dead cells or tumor cells
these results are the exact opposite of
the results predicted by the somatic
mutation theory of cancer which should
have said that the origin resides in the
nucleus these should have formed tumors
and these should have not formed tumors
also when normal mitochondria are
transplanted to cancer cells you get no
tumors you can suppress the the the the
development of the tumor
these fine is viewed together provide
the strongest evidence to date
that cancer cannot be a disease of
somatic mutations in the nucleus this
information together with the previous
information that i just presented
provides overwhelming evidence that the
disease cannot be a genetic disease
so if somatic mutations are not the
origin of cancer how do we get cancer
this was described originally by the
work of otto varberg
back in the in the 1920s 30s and 40s
cancers arise from the damage to
cellular respiration
energy through fermentation gradually
compensates for insufficient respiration
and cancer cells continue to ferment
lactic acid in the presence of oxygen
and this is referred to as the warburg
effect
cells should not continue to produce
fermentation when oxygen is present they
should shift back to oxidative
phosphorylation
the new the new findings that myself and
dr shinopoulos from semmelweis
university in budapest we found and we
found the missing link in warburg
central theory and that is cancer cells
can also ferment succinic acid derived
from glutamine glutamine derives
succinic acid and we call this the q
effect to make it diff to make
distinguish it from the warburg effect q
is the single letter for glutamine it's
the missing link that warburg did not
know about but can now
explain the majority of observations in
cancer
so enhanced fermentation is the
signature metabolic malady of all or
most cancer cells
so if each cancer cell has a different
genetic signature in other words all the
cells in the tumor have different
genetic mutations but all the cells in
the tumor have one common phenotype that
is they ferment then it makes sense to
target the common phenotype than to
chase after the genes which are
different in every single cancer cell
so what we have defined
in our in our this is the krebs cycle
the tca cycle
or the citric acid
cycle and we all memorize or we have to
know about this it's in the matrix of
the mitochondria
and we now know that this step that
preserve in normal cells produces very
little atp
in the cancer cell produces large
amounts of atp through a process of
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation this is a substrate
level phosphorylation step and now we
have defined this as the origin of most
of the energy in the cancer cell
and this shows mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorylation the missing link
in the metabolic theory and we just
recently published this paper in asn
neuro and it's in the glutaminolysis
pathway so glutamine to glutamate to
alpha ketoglutarate to succinyl coa to
succinate so this enzymatic is a
substrate level phosphorylation in the
mitochondria and it generates a large
amount of atp so the atp then is coming
from a different site in the
mitochondria than it in the cancer
mitochondria than it does in the
normal mitochondria
and this is a an example of what these
mitochondria look like in cancer cells
and this is a glioblastoma very
aggressive brain cancer but here's the
normal mitochondria and these stripes
are the cristae and they contain the
proteins lipids
and and enzymes that allow cells to
generate energy through oxidative
phosphorylation
so the cancer mitochondria in this
glioblastoma has crystallises the
cristae are missing and in biology we
have a major tenant
that structure determines function and
if the structure of the organelle
is abnormal the function of the of the
organelle will be abnormal if the parts
of the organelle responsible for
oxidative phosphorylation are missing
the organelle will be unable to generate
energy through oxidative phosphorylation
this is direct evidence indicating that
the structure of the organelle is
abnormal in this tumor cell and these
kinds of tumors glioblastoma but we also
see the same phenomenon in the in the
mitochondria of all kinds of cancers
here's breast cancer and colorectal
cancer and here you can see the tumor
cells with vacuoles and disorganized
cristae compared to normal and here you
can see in the colorectal mitochondria
that have no cristae structure
determines function we have found these
mitochondrial abnormalities in all types
of major cancers bladder cancer lung
cancer colon cancer
breast cancers
brain cancers
all the major types of cancers have have
we have seen the same structural
abnormalities others on my
ultrastructure analysis now the results
of this will alter the energy metabolism
in cells so if we look at energy
metabolism in normal cells we see that
the bulk of energy
comes from oxidative phosphorylation
with the waste products of co2 and water
so glucose is metabolized in the
glycolytic pathway to pyruvate pyruvate
enters the mitochondria and the krebs
cycle is fully oxidized and generates
this energy through the process of
oxidative phosphorylation very little
energy is coming out of the cytoplasm in
glycolysis or out of the krebs cycle
that i showed you before
in normal cells these are called
substrate-level phosphorylations they
can work in the presence or absence of
of oxygen
you have to realize that energy is the
key
necessity for life without energy
nothing can grow so it's very important
to know where the energy comes from
now this is the cancer cell energy is
coming from totally different places the
majority of energy so we get cancer cell
gets very little energy from oxidative
phosphorylation because the cristae and
the mitochondria are abnormal as i've
just shown you but this cell still
remains alive because it generates
energy in the cytoplasm with lactic acid
as a waste product which is the warburg
effect
or succinic acid as a waste product
coming from the krebs cycle so the krebs
cycle and glycolysis generate the
majority of energy through substrate
level phosphorylation and non-oxidative
process where much less energy now comes
from a from oxidative phosphorylation so
this is the key shift the cancer cell is
generating energy through different
processes so the question now how how
does this relate to dysregulated cell
growth how does this disturbed energy
metabolism link to the hallmarks of the
disease
and this is what we've been able to show
we've been able to reconfigure the
landscape of understanding cancer by
placing the focus on the origin for this
organelle the mitochondria so we know
and this was the concept of the
oncogenic paradox that plagued and
puzzled the field even to this day
you'll read and see many examples where
people simply don't understand how all
the provocative agents that have been
linked to the origin of cancer could
cause the disease through a common
pathophysiological mechanism
carcinogens cause cancer we know that
that's why they're called carcinogens
they cause cancer carcinogens damage
enter the mitochondria and damages oxfos
radiation
can damage oxidative phosphorylation
leading to the origin of cancer
intermittent hypoxia damages
mitochondria leading to the origin of
cancer
inflammation can damage mitochondrial
function chronic inflammation is a known
risk factor for the development of
cancer rare inherited mutations like the
bracha one and the leaf real many
mutations that people recognize they
operate by damaging mitochondria
the ras oncogene is known to be a
facilitator of cancer it damages
mitochondria
viruses we know of many different kinds
of viruses the papilloma virus hepatitis
c virus viruses can cause cancer because
they either the virus themselves or the
products of the virus damaged the
mitochondria and of course aging a
cancer is higher in older people than
younger people age damages by just
living on the planet age will damage
mitochondria now all of this
mitochondrial damage leads to the
reactive
generation of ros
which are reactive oxygen species
the reaction oxygen species damage the
nuclear genome lipids and proteins in
the cell so the mutations that we see in
cancer come as the result of damage from
reactive oxygen species the mutations
are an effect they are not the cause of
cancer so the majority of
of studies on cancer have really been
focusing on downstream epi phenomena
where the real origin of the disease is
related to the the function of the
mitochondria now interestingly enough
the rust domina the ross also damage
oxidative phosphorylation oxfoss the
mitochondria
cell send a signal to the nucleus
that that the organelle is incapable of
providing enough energy to maintain the
life of the cell this signaling system
then turns on genes in the nucleus that
upregulate substrate level
phosphorylation like hif1 alpha and mic
so in order to run substrate level
phosphorylation you need fermentable
fuels and the fermentable fuels are
glucose and glutamine
so the mitochondria signals the nucleus
the nucleus begins to upregulate
pathways uh transporters to bring in
glucose and glutamine through and
generating energy through substrate
level phosphorylation while the
mitochondria continue to suffer damage
and gradually lose their ability to
produce energy through oxfords it is
this transition
from oxidative phosphorylation to
substrate-level phosphorylation that
ultimately leads to the development of
dysregulated cell growth so we can then
link the hallmarks of cancer as defined
by hanahan and weinberg directly back to
damage to the respiration and energy
transition in the cell
so the first three hallmarks
self-sufficiency insensitivity to
anti-growth and limitless replicative
potential
is the result of the cell falling back
on its default state and the default
state of mammalian cells is
proliferation
and proliferation was the phenotype of
all cells and organisms on the planet
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
some 2.5 billion years ago so the cancer
cell is falling back on ancient pathways
that lead to unbridled proliferation as
all cells did before oxygen came into
the into the atmosphere this also leads
to blood vessel development in the
cancer cells which is angiogenesis in
the in the micro environment of the
cancer cell i should say
also leads to evasion of apoptosis or
programmed cell death
why is this cancer cell bypassing the
natural ability to
die when energy metabolism is so shifted
because the mitochondria control
apoptosis the mitochondria act as the
kill switch if the kill switch is broken
the cell will bypass its
its
cell death uh mechanism and therefore go
on to to um to uh proliferate now the
key question is metastasis which is
ultimately responsible for the death of
of cancer patients how do you link
metastasis to disturbed energy
metabolism first we need to look at the
metastatic cascade so the medic
metastatic cascade is a stereotypical
typical series of events that underlie
uh the origin from any tissue breast
cancer colon cancer you know bladder
cancer all these different cancers to
spread around the body go through the
same cascade first there is a local
invasion so here are the green cells
represented as the cancer cells they
become
metabolically destabilized enter their
default state of proliferation and
eventually break through the basement
membrane and enter into the local tissue
intravasation
now some of these cells have the ability
to enter into the blood vessels and then
um
avoid the immune system and actually
suppress the immune system so
survival and immunosuppressive effects
they also move through the bloodstream
and extravazate leave the bloodstream
and form tumors in distant organs and
that's ultimately what we call cancer
spreader metastasis so a question is how
can the accumulation of random somatic
mutations
cause a non-random metastatic cascade
based on the epithelial mesenchymal
transition which i haven't talked about
but this is the basis for cancer
metastasis based on the somatic mutation
theory it makes no sense so the question
is how how how do we explain all of this
based on the mitochondrial metabolic
theory of cancer
so it is linked to the uh the macrophage
fusion hypothesis
macrophages these red cells are actually
uh guardians of our body their wound
healing cells they patrol our entire
entire body they enter and exit
bloodstream they
they work with the immune system they
are part of the immune system so when we
have an incipient here's normal
epithelial cells many cancers arise from
epithelial cells so they become
destabilized by any one of the
provocative agents they have
destabilized energy metabolism they're
entering their default state but they
are not capable of spreading around the
body
our immune cells come into this micro
environment recognizing cancer as an
unhealed wound
and they begin to throw out growth
factors in cytokines which is like
putting gasoline on the fire it
stimulates these incipient cancer cells
to grow even more even more disorganized
and dysregulated the immune cells
will fuse to put out the
heal the wound they'll either fuse
together or fuse
with the cancer these incipient cancer
cells thereby diluting the cytoplasm
with abnormal mitochondria now what you
have is these
rogue macrophages former immune cells
they are already genetically programmed
to spread throughout the body because
this is what they do in their normal
function but now they are metabolically
destabilized with a genetic architecture
to spread around the body and that's
what they do they intravisit and they
suppress the immune system and they are
the tumor cells that will be the most
deadly and they are heavily dependent on
glutamine and glucose for their survival
so recognizing that all cancer cells
require glutamine and glucose especially
the metastatic cells
so if most cancer cells obtain energy
through fermentation then what therapies
might we be effective in managing and
preventing the tumors well one strategy
is to reduce levels of fermentable fuels
while elevating levels of
non-fermentable fuels and this is a
simple diagram
illustrating how we begin to shift
levels of the fermentable fuel glucose
and replacing glucose with the
non-fermentable fuel ketone bodies which
are derived from the mobilization of
fats in the liver so the liver makes
ketone bodies out of mobilized fats so
blood sugar must be lowered because the
cancer cells thrive on fermentable
glucose so glucose is fermented to
lactic acid so in order to stop that
process it is important to lower blood
sugar levels but but we're taking away a
fuel right so you have to replace one
fuel with another fuel so we increase
ketone bodies ketone bodies have to be
respired in normal mitochondria if the
mitochondria are defective they can't
use ketone bodies for energy only normal
cells with normal mitochondria can use
the ketone bodies for energy so when
people say cancer cells can burn ketone
bodies no they can't then they would
have to argue against all of the
structural defects that i just showed
you on the structure function in the
mitochondria mitochondria of cancer
cells cannot burn ketones as a matter of
fact ketones are absolutely toxic to
many cancer cells
so we developed the glucose ketone index
calculator which is a simple tool to
monitor therapeutic efficacy and the
metabolic management not only a brain
cancer because we now know that all
cancers suffer a similar similar problem
so this tool can be used to
to help uh monitor therapies for all
types of types of cancer and basically
it's the ratio of glucose and
millimolars to ketone bodies in
millimolar and you get this gki glucose
ketone index and we showed with others
that therapeutic efficacy is considered
best with index ratios approaching 1.0
or below and i'll discuss it can be
challenging to get to these ratios but
it's these ratios that will be effective
in managing all types of cancer
now we adopted this glucose ketone index
into a more global approach to cancer
management called the press pulse
therapy
using two different strategies a chronic
press that puts stress on on the cancer
cell metabolism and then acute pulses
specific specifically drugs and
procedures that will
interact synergistically will work
synergistically with press therapies so
essentially with the goal
is to
gradually move
the patient from a state of disease to a
state of health by strategically
targeting tumor cells while enhancing
the health and vitality of normal cells
a very different strategy than is what
is currently done so certain press
therapies include ketogenic metabolic
therapy using restricted ketogenic diets
and ketone supplements stress management
emotional stress contributes anxiety
contributes to elevated blood sugar so
we do we do stress management therapies
to lower anxiety and blood sugar
through
corticosteroid elevation we reduce
corticosteroid elevation and then we use
certain drugs and procedures that work
to target availability of glucose and
glutamine working together with the
press therapy and gradually the cancer
is degraded slowly and uh the patient
will emerge from the treatment healthier
than when they started the key goal here
is to is to degrade and kill tumor cells
without harming the body and even
enhancing the health and vitality of the
of the
of the overall body now this is a paper
that we recently published in a
pre-clinical system for glioblastoma
outlining how press pulse works to
manage aggressive
brain cancer
malignant brain cancer and we combined a
calorie restricted ketogenic diet that
is
ketogenic metabolic
therapy together with a glucose
targeting drug called don
uh uh six dioxy nor glucene this is a a
drug that looks like glutamine but
cannot be metabolized and this strategic
uh synergistic interaction was able to
significantly kill and wipe out these
brain cancer cells while improving
overall survival and quality of life now
this is great this the the concepts are
built on the pre-clinical system and we
also then use this to treat a patient
this same concept
press pulse metabolic strategy to treat
a young man with glioblastoma
from egypt
the patient was doing remarkably well
unfortunately we had to use standard of
care which involved radiation and
chemotherapy
but he survived most of that quite well
using the press pulse metabolic therapy
we published this paper after two years
the patient was doing very very well but
unfortunately the patient expired at 30
months of age
dying relatively quickly
at 30 months and an autopsy biopsy
material was taken and it turned out
that the patient had died not from the
tumor but from the damaged radiation
necrosis the the radiation that was used
as part of the standard of care was was
described as being responsible for the
demise of this patient now based on this
and much many other
much other information we published this
paper a provocative question should
ketogenic metabolic therapy become the
standard of care for glioblastoma and
what we did here is we outlined in no
uncertain terms how the current use of
radiation and chemo is largely
responsible for facilitating the
recurrence and growth and demise of the
majority of brain cancer patients so
it's the therapy itself that's putting
these poor patients at risk for early
and rapid death so it is my opinion that
replacement of standard of care with
ketogenic metabolic therapy will not
only improve progression-free and
overall survival but but also help these
patients to uh overcome their disease in
in in a less far less toxic way and we
think this will be the future this has
to be the future because the current
system is not working
now this is a paper that recently came
out showing how press pulse metabolic
therapy could could uh manage a highly
metastatic thioma in a woman no
radiation no chemo no standard of care
but only metabolic therapy these these
papers uh
present
um the rationale
uh for why uh the approach to metabolic
therapy
should be considered for the management
of cancer and this is another paper that
we recently published uh
using ketogenic metabolic therapy how
how that would work as a complementary
or alternative approach to managing
breast cancer and we think the majority
of breast cancer patients
whether triple negative or what what
class they have because all cancers
suffer the same metabolic malady that
they would respond remarkably well to
ketogenic metabolic therapy as an
alternative or even complementary
approach to standards of care so and
this is the paper where we also showed
outlined how biopsy taking biopsy tissue
from the breast can put the patient at
risk for spreading the cancer in other
words making it much worse so why are we
taking the biopsy material to do gene
profiles to see what kind of when the
genes are are largely irrelevant to the
disease so we we've outlined that
ketogenic metabolic therapy could be the
best approach for managing not only
breast cancer but by all cancers because
of the underlying origin of the disease
so in conclusion
most if not all cancers are a type of
mitochondrial metabolic disease cancer
is not a genetic disease has been widely
considered and it is my view that this
misunderstanding of cancer as a genetic
disease is largely
responsible for the failure to reduce
death rates from cancer so until this
changes i don't see much progress
happening
a reliance on substrate-level
phosphorylation for energy is the
metabolic hallmark
of most if not all cancers
therefore based on that knowledge the
simultaneous
restriction of glucose and glutamine can
help manage most cancers
the press pulse metabolic therapy is a
non-toxic cost-effective strategy for
the possible management of most cancers
and eventually this press pulse therapy
will replace these toxic and ineffective
standards of care
i'd like to thank recognize the various
large numbers of people that have worked
with us over the years to develop the
concepts that i've presented and moving
forward we hope to develop a global
society for metabolic therapy where we
can we can replace current toxic
standards of care with
more rational more unders more less
cost-effective and less toxic strategies
to improve overall survival and
progression free survival and finally
i'd like to thank those who support our
research especially the foundation for
metabolic cancer therapy set up by
travis christopherson and if those would
you know we we we need support for our
research and and this these foundations
and groups have been very helpful in
keeping our research program going so
that we can develop the concepts further
uh that i've mentioned in this talk the
george you foundation dr joseph maroon
uh mr edward miller the kenneth rainen
foundation the crossfit organization
boston college research fund children
with cancer united kingdom and the nih
and thank you for your attention